WIP Getting Started & Installing Ruby Guides (#4)
excid3/rails: guides/source/getting_started.md

  TRANSACTION (0.1ms)  BEGIN immediate TRANSACTION /*application='Store'*/
  Product Destroy (0.4ms)  DELETE FROM "products" WHERE "products"."id" = 1 /*application='Store'*/
  TRANSACTION (0.1ms)  COMMIT TRANSACTION /*application='Store'*/
=> #<Product:0x0000000125813d48 id: 1, name: "T-Shirt", created_at: "2024-11-09 22:39:38.498730000 +0000", updated_at: "2024-11-09 22:39:38.498730000 +0000">
```

This deleted the T-Shirt product from our database. We can confirm this with `Product.all` to see that that it only returns Pants.

```irb
store(dev)> Product.all
  Product Load (1.9ms)  SELECT "products".* FROM "products" /* loading for pp */ LIMIT 11 /*application='Store'*/
=>
[#<Product:0x000000012abde4c8
  id: 2,
  name: "Pants",
  created_at: "2024-11-09 22:33:19.638912000 +0000",
  updated_at: "2024-11-09 22:33:19.638912000 +0000">]
```

### Validations

Active Record provides *validations* which allows you to ensure data inserted into the database adheres to certain rules.

Let's add a `presence` validation to the Product model to ensure that all products must have a `name`.

```ruby
class Product < ApplicationRecord
  validates :name, presence: true
end
```

> Let's try to create a Product without a name in the Rails console.

Reviewer: You may have to use the `reload!` command to refresh the console before testing the validation.

- `example.org` is the **host**
- `/products` is the **path**
- `?sale=true&sort=asc` are the **query parameters**

### HTTP Methods and Their Purpose

HTTP requests use methods to tell a server what action it should perform for a given URL. Here are the most common methods:

- A `GET` request tells the server to retrieve the data for a given URL (e.g., loading a page or fetching a record).
- A `POST` request will submit data to the URL for processing (usually creating a new record).
- A `PUT` or `PATCH` request submits data to a URL to update an existing record.
- A `DELETE` request to a URL tells the server to delete a record.

### Rails Routes

A `route` in Rails refers to a line of code that pairs an HTTP Method and a URL path. The route also tells Rails which `controller` and `action` should respond to a request.

To define a route in Rails, let's go back to your code editor and add the following route to `config/routes.rb`

```ruby
Rails.application.routes.draw do
  get "/products", to: "products#index"
end
```

This route tells Rails to look for GET requests to the `/products` path. In this example, we specified `"products#index"` for where to route the request.

> When Rails sees a request that matches, it will send the request to the `ProductsController` and the `index` action inside of that controller. This is how Rails will the request and return a response to the browser.

Reviewer: Should be 'This is how Rails will **handle** the request and return a response to the browser. (missing word)

The Rails philosophy includes two major guiding principles:

- **Don't Repeat Yourself:** DRY is a principle of software development which states that "Every piece of knowledge must have a single, unambiguous, authoritative representation within a system". By not writing the same information over and over again, our code is more maintainable, more extensible, and less buggy.
- **Convention Over Configuration:** Rails has opinions about the best way to do many things in a web application, and defaults to this set of conventions, rather than require that you define them yourself through endless configuration files.

Creating a new Rails app
------------------------

We're going to build a project called `store` that will be a simple e-commerce example app that showcases several powerful features that Rails includes as standard.

### Prerequisites

For this project, you will need:

* Ruby 3.2 or newer
* Rails 8.0.0 or newer

> 

Author: We don't need to anymore. SQLite used to be a dependency you had to install separately. It is now precompiled into the Ruby gem and just works™ without the extra dependency.

Follow the [Install Ruby on Rails Guide](install_ruby_on_rails.html) if you need to install Ruby on Rails.

> 

Author: We recommend they use WSL on Windows (not the old way of installing Ruby directly on Windows which would be C:\) so they will be in an Ubuntu terminal in Windows, so it will be the same for everyone.

Let's verify that Rails is installed correctly. Open a command line prompt and run the following. You should see a version number printed out:

```bash
$ rails --version
Rails 8.0.0
```

### Creating Your First Rails App

Rails comes with several commands to make life easier. `rails new` generates a fresh Rails application for you. You can run `rails --help` to see all of the commands.

To create our `store` application, run the following:

```bash
$ rails new store
```

NOTE: You can use flags to customize the application Rails generates. To see those options, run `rails new --help`.

After your new application is created, switch to its directory:

```bash
$ cd store
```

### Directory Structure

> Let's take a quick glance at the files and directories that are included in a new Rails application.

Author: Added a note to open this folder in your code editor or run `ls -la` to see them in the terminal.

`t.string :name` tells Rails to create a column in the `products` table called `name` and set the type as `string`.

`t.timestamps` is a shortcut for defining two columns on your models: `created_at:datetime` and `updated_at:datetime`. You'll see these columns on most Active Record models in Rails and they are automatically set by Active Record when creating or updating records.

### Running Migrations

To run migrations in Rails, you can run the following command:

```bash
$ bin/rails db:migrate
```
This command checks for any new migrations and applies them to your database. Its output looks like this:

```bash
== 20240426151900 CreateProducts: migrating ===================================
-- create_table(:products)
   -> 0.0030s
== 20240426151900 CreateProducts: migrated (0.0031s) ==========================
```

If you make a mistake, you can run `rails db:rollback` to undo the last migration.

Now that we have created our products table, we can interact with it in Rails. Let's try it out.

Rails Console
-------------

> The *console* is a helpful tool for testing code in Rails applications. It's an interactive prompt built upon Ruby's IRB that automatically loads your Rails application.

Author: I don't think it's particularly helpful for beginners to know it's built on IRB, so I'm going to drop it. They just need to know it's an interactive Ruby prompt.

A `GET` request to a URL tells the server to retrieve the data for the page.
A `POST` request will submit data to the URL for processing (usually creating a new record).
A `PUT` or `PATCH` request submits data to a URL for updating a record.
A `DELETE` request to a URL tells the server to delete a record.

### Rails Routes

A `route` in Rails refers to a line of code that matches an HTTP Method  and a URL path. The route also tells Rails which `controller` and `action` should respond to a request that matches.

To define a route in Rails, we can add the following to `config/routes.rb`

```ruby
Rails.application.routes.draw do
  get "/products", to: "products#index"
end
```

This route tells Rails to look for GET requests to the `/products` path. When Rails sees a request that matches, it will send the request to a Controller and Action for handling the request and generating a response.

In this example, we specified `"products#index"` for where to route the request. This translates to a class named `ProductsController` and the `index` action inside of it. This will be responsible for handling the request and returning a response to the browser.

> You'll notice that we don't need to specify the protocol, domain, or query params in our routes. That's basically because the protocol and domain are for making sure the request reaches your server. From there, Rails picks up the request and knows to use the path for responding to the request. The query params are like options that Rails can use to apply to the request, so they are typically used in the controller for filtering the data.

Reviewer 2: Does this last sentence refer to the dynamically matching section below? "The query params are options that Rails can use when processing the request, so they are typically passed through to the controller and used for filtering the data." If so maybe we should move it there.

Let's look at another example. Add this line after the previous route:

```ruby
post "/products", to: "products#create"
```

Here, we're telling Rails to listen to POST requests to "/products" and process those requests in the `ProductsController` with the `create` action.

Routes may also need to dynamically match requests. So how does that work?

```ruby
get "/products/:id", to: "products#show"
```

> This route has `:id` in it. This is called a `parameter` and it captures a portion of the URL to be used later for processing the request. If a user visits `/products/1`, the `:id` param is set to `1` and can be used in the controller action for looking up the Product record with ID of 1.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This route has `:id` in it. This is called a `parameter` and it captures a portion of the URL to be used later for processing the request. If a user visits `/products/1`, the `:id` param is set to `1` and can be used in the controller action for looking up and displaying the Product record with an ID of 1.
```

> Route parameters don't have to be Integers either. For example, you could have a blog with articles and match `/blog/hello-world` with the following route:

Reviewer 2: Passing a note from the beginner: "This paragraph and the resulting example totally lost me. What is the "slug" command? How does it know the name of the blog you want matched."

Reviewer 2: I know the answer is in the question here, but just wanted to pass through that this paragraph and example made her stop and question.

- **Convention Over Configuration:** Rails has opinions about the best way to do many things in a web application, and defaults to this set of conventions, rather than require that you specify minutiae through endless configuration files.

Creating a new Rails app
------------------------

We're going to build a project called `store` that will be a simple e-commerce example app that showcases several powerful features that Rails includes out of the box.

### Prerequisites

The only requirement to use Rails is having a recent version of Ruby installed.

* Ruby 3.2 or newer

Open a command line prompt and verify that you have Ruby installed:

```bash
$ ruby --version
ruby 3.3.5
```

If you don't have Ruby installed, follow the [Installing Ruby Guide](installing_ruby.html).

### Installing Rails

Use Ruby's `gem` command to install the latest version of Rails. This will download Rails from Rubygems.org and make it available in your shell.

```bash
$ gem install rails
```

To verify that Rails is installed correctly, run the following and you should see a version number printed out:

```bash
$ rails --version
Rails 8.0.0
```

> ### Creating your first Rails app

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Creating Your First Rails App
```

Rails comes with several commands to make life easier. `rails new` generates a fresh Rails application for you. You can run `rails --help` to see all of the commands.

To create our `store` application, run the following:

```bash
$ rails new store
```

NOTE: You can use flags to customize the application Rails generates. To see those options, run `rails new --help`.

> After your new application is created, switch to it's directory:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After your new application is created, switch to its directory:
```

|Rakefile|This file locates and loads tasks that can be run from the command line. The task definitions are defined throughout the components of Rails. Rather than changing `Rakefile`, you should add your own tasks by adding files to the `lib/tasks` directory of your application.|
|README.md|This is a brief instruction manual for your application. You should edit this file to tell others what your application does, how to set it up, and so on.|
|script/|Contains one-off or general purpose [scripts](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/main/railties/lib/rails/generators/rails/script/USAGE) and [benchmarks](https://github.com/rails/rails/blob/main/railties/lib/rails/generators/rails/benchmark/USAGE).|

> |storage/|Conatins SQLite databases and Active Storage files for Disk Service. This is covered in [Active Storage Overview](active_storage_overview.html).|

Reviewer 4: +1

```
This command checks for any new migrations and applies them to your database. It's output looks like this:

```bash
== 20240426151900 CreateProducts: migrating ===================================
-- create_table(:products)
   -> 0.0030s
== 20240426151900 CreateProducts: migrated (0.0031s) ==========================
```

If you make a mistake, you can run `rails db:rollback` to undo the last migration.

Now that we have created our products table, we can interact with it in Rails. Let's try it out.

Rails Console
-------------

The *console* is a helpful tool for testing code in Rails applications. It's an interactive prompt built upon Ruby's IRB that automatically loads your Rails application.

```bash
$ bin/rails console
```

You will be presented with a prompt like the following:

```irb
Loading development environment (Rails 8.0.0)
store(dev)>
```

Here we can type code that will be executed when we hit `Enter`. Let's try printing out the Rails version:

```irb
store(dev)> Rails.version
=> "8.0.0"
```

It works! Let's use the Rails console now to interact with our database using the Active Record model we just created.

To exit the Rails console, type `exit` and hit Enter.

> Active Record Model Basics

Author: Yeah, noted this in the PR description but wasn't familiar with how to add this to Rouge but I managed to figure it out today. 👍 

<img width="851" alt="Screenshot 2024-11-08 at 1 51 43 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4ed6fbb4-a3d8-4196-be0d-693a7d505760">

    end
  end

  private

    def set_product
      @product = Product.find(params[:id])
    end

    def product_params
      params.expect(product: [ :name ])
    end
end
```

#### Extracting Partials

We've already written a form for creating new products. Wouldn't it be nice if we could reuse that for edit and update? We can using a feature called "partials" that allow you to reuse a view in multiple places.

We can move the form into a file called `app/views/products/_form.html.erb`. The filename starts with an underscore denotes this is a partial.

We also want to replace any instance variables with a local variable. We'll replace `@product` with `product`.

```erb
<%= form_with model: product do |form| %>
  <div>
    <%= form.label :name %>
    <%= form.text_field :name %>
  </div>

  <div>
    <%= form.submit %>
  </div>
<% end %>
```

To use this partial in our new view, we can replace the form with a render call:

```erb
<h1>New product</h1>

<%= render "form", product: @product %>
<%= link_to "Cancel", products_path %>
```

The edit view becomes almost the exact same thing thanks to the form partial.

```erb
<h1>Edit product</h1>

<%= render "form", product: @product %>

> <%= link_to "Cancel", @product %>

Author: Ah yes, missed that! Thanks!

```

### Deleting Products

> The last feature we need to implement is deleting products. We will add a `destroy` action to our `ProductsController` to handle `DELETE /products/:id` requests:

Author: Good catch!

Rails comes with an authentication generator that we can use. It creates User and Session models and the controllers and views necessary to login to our application.

```bash
$ bin/rails generate authentication
```

Then migrate the database to add the User and Session tables.

```bash
$ bin/rails db:migrate
```

Next, we will create a User using the Rails console. Feel free to user your own email and password instead of the example.

```irb
store(dev)> User.create! email_address: "you@example.org", password: "s3cr3t", password_confirmation: "s3cr3t"
```

Restart your Rails server so it picks up the `bcrypt` gem added by the generator. BCrypt is used for securely hashing passwords for authentication.

When you visit any page, Rails will prompt for a username and password. Enter the email and password you used when creating the User record.

Try it out by visiting http://localhost:3000/products/new

If you enter the correct username and password, it will allow you through. Your browser will also store these credentials for future requests so you don't have to type it in every page view.

### Adding Log Out

> To log out of the application, we can add a button to the top of `app/views/layouts/application.html.erb` to show it on every page.

Author: I like that. Will do. 👍

```bash
Read fragment views/products/show:a5a585f985894cd27c8b3d49bb81de3a/products/1-20240918154439539125 (1.3ms)
```

The cache entry was written by the last request, so Rails finds the cache entry on the second request. Rails also changes the cache key when records are updated to ensure that it never renders stale cache data.

Learn more in the [Caching with Rails](caching_with_rails.html) guide.

Adding CSS & JavaScript
-----------------------

CSS & JavaScript are core parts of building web applications, so let's learn how to use them with Rails.

### Propshaft

Rails' asset pipeline is called Propshaft. It takes your CSS, JavaScript, images, and other assets and serves them to your browser. In production, Propshaft digests your assets so they can be cached indefinitely for performance.

Let's modify `app/assets/stylesheets/application.css` and change our font to sans-serif.

```css
body {
  font-family: Arial, Helvetica, sans-serif;
}

nav {
  display: flex;
  gap: 0.5rem;
}

img {
  max-width: 800px;
}

.notice {
  color: green;
}
```

Refresh your page and you'll see the CSS has been applied.

### Importmaps

> Rails uses Importmaps for JavaScript by default. This allows you to write modern JavaScript modules with no build steps.

Reviewer 5: I wondered if this might be a bit advanced for beginners to grasp. Could go with something like: 

```suggestion
Rails uses Importmaps for JavaScript by default. This allows you to write modern JavaScript modules directly in your Rails application.
```

Reviewer 3: Hey, "import map" is written that way in https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/script/type/importmap (two words, lower case).

For example, "An import map is a JSON object that allows developers...".

pin "@hotwired/stimulus-loading", to: "stimulus-loading.js"
pin_all_from "app/javascript/controllers", under: "controllers"
```

This file maps the JavaScript package names with the source file which is used to generate the importmap tag in the browser.

### Hotwire

We haven't written any JavaScript yet, but we have been using Hotwire on the frontend.

Hotwire is a JavaScript framework designed to take full advantage of server-side generated HTML. It is comprised of 3 core components:

1. [**Turbo**](https://turbo.hotwired.dev/) handles navigation, form submissions, page components, and updates without writing any custom JavaScript.
2. [**Stimulus**](https://stimulus.hotwired.dev/) provides a framework for when you need custom JavaScript to add functionality to the page.
3. [**Native**](https://native.hotwired.dev/) allows you to make hybrid mobile apps by embedding your web app and progressively enhancing it with native mobile features.

Learn more in the [Asset Pipeline](asset_pipeline.html) and [Working with JavaScript in Rails](working_with_javascript_in_rails.html) guides.

Rich text fields with Action Text
--------------------------------

> Many applications need rich text with embeds and Rails provides this functionailty out of the box with Action Text.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Many applications need rich text with embeds (i.e. multimedia elements) and Rails provides this functionailty out of the box with Action Text.
```

  private

  def set_subscriber
    @subscriber = Subscriber.find_by_token_for(:unsubscribe, params[:token])
  end
end
```

Last but not least, let's add the unsubscribe link to our email templates.

In `app/views/product_mailer/in_stock.html.erb`, add a `link_to`:

```erb
<h1>Good news!</h1>

<p><%= link_to @product.name, product_url(@product) %> is back in stock.</p>

<%= link_to "Unsubscribe", unsubscribe_url(token: params[:subscriber].generate_token_for(:unsubscribe)) %>
```

In `app/views/product_mailer/in_stock.text.erb`, add the URL in plain text:

```erb
Good news!

<%= @product.name %> is back in stock.
<%= product_url(@product) %>

Unsubscribe: <%= unsubscribe_url(token: params[:subscriber].generate_token_for(:unsubscribe)) %>
```

When the unsubscribe link is clicked, the subscriber record will be deleted from the database. The controller also safely handles invalid or expired tokens without raising any errors.

Use the Rails console to send another email and test the unsubscribe link in the logs.

Testing
-------

Rails comes with a robust test suite. Let's write a test to ensure that the correct number of emails are sent when a product is back in stock.

### Fixtures

> Tests often rely on records in the database. Rails provides fixtures which are copied into the database and given names to easily look up records in your tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you generate a model using Rails, it automatically creates a corresponding fixture file in the `test/fixtures` directory. 

Fixtures are predefined sets of data that populate your test database before running tests. They allow you to define records with easy-to-remember names, making it simple to access them in your tests.

This file will be empty by default - you need to populate it with fixtures for your tests.

Let’s update the product fixtures file with this data:
```

```yaml
# test/fixtures/products.yml
tshirt:
  name: T-Shirt
  inventory_count: 15
```

> For subscribers, we can add two fixtures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And for subscribers, let's add these two fixtures:
```

Rails includes the Brakeman gem for checking security issues with your application.

Run `bin/brakeman` and it will analyze your application and output a report.

```bash
$ bin/brakeman
Loading scanner...
...

== Overview ==

Controllers: 6
Models: 6
Templates: 15
Errors: 0
Security Warnings: 0

== Warning Types ==

No warnings foundd
```

Learn more about [Securing Rails Applications](security.html)

Continuous Integration with GitHub Actions
------------------------------------------

Rails apps generate a `.github` folder that includes a prewritten GitHub Actions configuration that runs rubocop, brakeman, and our test suite.

When we push our code to a GitHub repository with GitHub Actions enabled, it will automatically run these steps and report back success or failure for each. This allows us to monitor our code changes for defects and issues and ensure consistent quality for our work.

Deploying to Production
-----------------------

Rails comes with a zero-downtime deployment tool called [Kamal](https://kamal-deploy.org) that we can use to deploy our  application directly to a server. Kamal uses Docker containers to run your application and deploy with zero downtime.

> Rails comes with a production-ready Dockerfile that Kamal will use to build the image. The Dockerfile uses [Thruster](https://github.com/basecamp/thruster) to compress and serve assets efficiently in production.

Author: I think your description works well. 👍
